Our Planet’s Twin Crises
In her last newsletter for the Times, a Climate Forward reporter reflects on the intertwined problems of climate change and biodiversity loss.
The world’s largest river, the Amazon, has fallen to its lowest level on record in the past few weeks, a development that has shocked experts around the world.

Rising temperatures, fueled by global warming, seem to be the driving force behind the powerful drought. They’re parching the largest freshwater reservoir on the planet, Ana Ionova reported, and pushing the Brazilian government to take drastic measures that were once unthinkable.

But, though climate change has fueled much of the Amazon’s problems, it is also true that deforestation has gradually chipped away at the jungle’s ability to replenish its own water supplies. The forest can, in fact, create its own rain, researchers have found.

This brings to mind one of the main lessons I’ve learned from reporting on our planet’s environmental catastrophes: The price for the destruction of nature may not be immediately clear, but someone always pays it, and it’s often steeper than government leaders imagined it would be.

I wanted to share that thought with you because, after two and a half years, I am leaving the Climate Forward team for a new role. I write this with a heavy heart, but also with the hope that I helped you see how the world’s two main ecological crises, climate change and biodiversity loss, are interconnected.

Governments are increasingly aware of this. In two weeks, high-ranking officials from around the world will gather in Cali, Colombia, to discuss how countries are doing on their pledge to protect nature at a global biodiversity summit known as COP16. One of Colombia’s goals is for countries to come out of it with a commitment that addresses the biodiversity and the climate crises at the same time. But with countries falling short on both fronts, it’s a tall order.

Since I joined the Climate Forward team, my goal has been to help you see both the problems and solutions that emerge from this challenge.

We’ve introduced to you a lawyer running afoul of the Indian government to protect forests in courts, Indigenous people in Canada protecting traditions that can help keep ecological disaster at bay, and a government official who had dedicated his life to protect uncontacted tribes in Brazil.

We’ve reported on the innovative strategies trying to make the Amazon’s forests more profitable than beef and efforts to introduce nature-related risk to companies’ balance sheets, as well as the debate about how to fix the supply chains of commodities, like chocolate and palm oil, that put ecosystems at risk.

We also reported on how to think about personal decisions, whether about owning a car, talking to your neighbors or buying gifts on Christmas; and about the ways governments are rethinking their polices on taxes, fossil fuel subsidies and how we grow our food.

But some of the newsletters that I cherish the most were the ones you helped me write. You told us about the wildlife in your communities, the generational differences in your families and how some of you have addressed climate change in your jobs.